Our next session this afternoon
is Direct to Java Client.
I wanted to make a quick comment
before we actually started the session.
For those of you who are at the
State of the Union and we showed
a two-tier Java Client demo,
I wanted to make sure that
you guys did catch the part
that that was a two-tier demo,
not a three-tier demo.
And I've asked Andreas to come
back in the session following
this one to talk a little bit
more about two-tier Java Client.
You won't be hearing a lot
about that in this session,
but you will in the next session.
And if he has time,
he will also rerun that demo for you.
Okay?
So I'd like to introduce Ernest Kim,
who is your presenter for
Direct to Java Client.
Thank you.
Thanks, Tony.
So welcome to session 706
on Direct to Java Client.
My name is Ernest Kim,
and I'm a member of the
WebObjects rapid development team.
So if you attended the State of
the Union of Java and Apple,
what you found is that my boss's
boss's boss's friend is James Gosling.
So obviously he and I are very close.
So rapid development is really,
really fun team to work in in
WebObjects because they work on
things like Direct to Java Client
and Direct to Web Services,
which if you were here
for the previous session,
you saw an interesting demo of.
And it's my pleasure to talk to you
today about Direct to Java Client.
But before I do, what is Java Client?
Java Client is a great technology.
Now, many of you are probably
familiar with WebObjects already,
knowing that WebObjects is a
great technology for developing
three-tier HTML-based applications.
Well, it turns out that WebObjects
also has a great technology for
developing desktop applications,
Java Client.
So Java Client is a technology for
creating distributed three-tier
applications for the desktop.
When we say three-tier applications,
we mean that at the bottom there
is a database that stores the data.
At the top, there is a client that
displays the user interface.
And in between,
there's the application server,
which accesses the database and
controls exactly what the client can do.
The interesting thing about Java Client
is that all three tiers use a
common protocol for communication,
HTTP.
And the clients are
implemented in pure Java,
so this means swing.
The great thing about Java is that it
is reliable and platform-independent.
A nice thing about Java Client
is that it has been designed
with localization in mind.
So it is very easy to localize
your Java Client applications.
One thing to bear in mind, however,
is that Java Client is intended
for use in an intranet and not
for high traffic intranet sites.
The reason is that a client
is fairly heavyweight.
It is larger than three megabytes,
and it may take a long time for a
customer with a very slow connection
to download the entire client.
So now that we know what Java Client is,
let's talk about Direct to Java Client.
Direct to Java Client is an
infrastructure that helps you to
create applications really quickly.
Perhaps the defining characteristic
of Direct to Java Client is that it
generates the user interface dynamically.
A key strength of Direct to
Java Client is that it provides a
great deal of built-in functionality.
So this relieves you from the
burden of having to create the
entire user interface by hand.
Because Direct to Java Client
creates an application dynamically
in such a short amount of time,
it is ideal for prototyping purposes.
Now we understand that the default
application that Direct to Java Client
creates for you may not support exactly
the kind of user interface that you want.
Fortunately,
there exists a number of powerful
customization techniques so that
you can create precisely the kind
of user interface that you want.
So that is Direct to Java Client.
So what will you learn today?
Well, I hope that by the end
of today's session,
you'll see exactly what the
default applications offer you,
which is actually a lot.
You'll see why you should
use Direct to Java Client.
You'll learn how to customize
default applications.
And finally,
because it is such a hot topic
and probably the real reason
people are attending developer
conferences these days,
how to leverage the power of web
services in your application.
So before I go into that,
how about a quick demonstration
of exactly what Direct to
Java Client is all about?
And here to help me with that is
Brent Shank of Technical Publications.
Thanks, Ernest.
All right, I'm going to present a short
demo here for the first one.
This is similar to what
Andreas presented in the tools
overview earlier in the week.
So simply based on an EO model file,
I'm going to generate a three-tier
swing application that accesses
a data store on the back end.
So here we are in EO model,
showing you the real estate model
that we've been using all week
for web objects applications.
So in Project Builder,
I'm simply going to make a new
Direct to Java Client application.
And in the Project Builder
Assistant,
I am mostly just going to select
the defaults that it gives to me.
And if you want to really
know what these are all about,
there's a good book on Java Client
that we'll tell you about later
describing these in depth.
I am going to add the EO model that
you just saw in the background there.
Select some other options here.
You see this Web Start pane here.
This helps us configure the
Web Start JNLP file that we will
use to deploy this application.
Okay,
so Project Builder is going to build and
run the client and server applications.
And what it's doing right now
is compiling all our source
files and aggregating all the
frameworks and things like that.
And in a second, it's going to analyze
the EO model right here.
And based on a sophisticated
set of rules in the rule system,
it's going to create for
us a swing application.
So here it is.
So now you'll notice that this is
a fully functional application.
I can search for data.
I can open records that I find.
Here's a record.
I can make changes that I want.
Commit things back to the data store.
So there we are.
Without writing any code,
we have a great swing application.
Thanks, Brent.
We'll try to make the next demo a
little more challenging for you.
So now that you have seen a little bit
of what Direct to Java Client offers you,
let's take a look at the colorful
technology that makes this all possible.
The most important thing to take
away from this diagram is that you
have the same control layer on both
sides of the client server divide.
So what this means is that
your business logic lives on
both the client and the server.
The next important thing to take away
is that there's a key difference between
the ways that a client and a server
accesses the tier that's underneath it.
On the server side,
there's the access layer and the
various enterprise objects adapters
for handling communication between
the server and the database.
On the client side, however,
there's the distribution layer.
It handles the communication
between the client and the server.
The final important thing to
take away from this diagram
is that a web ob... a j- a JavaClient
application is a WebObjects
application with the addition
of a rules system on the server side.
The rules system is what
actually generates a description
of the user interface.
And a JavaClient client becomes a
direct-to-JavaClient client with the
addition of the generation layer.
This is what actually will build
a hierarchy of controllers.
I will talk about this in
more detail soon enough.
But now that you have an eagle-eyes
view of the application architecture,
let's talk about some of the
core concepts in creating
a JavaClient application.
Well, there are several kinds
of display objects.
There are display groups that coordinate
the flow between the user interface
objects and the editing contexts.
There are associations,
which will actually synchronize
values between the user interface
objects and the business objects.
And finally, there are aspects,
which simply... to simply define
various parameters of display objects.
And having seen these,
I would now like to introduce the
heart and soul of Java Client,
which are the controllers.
The controllers are what actually
implement the client functionality.
You can consider controllers to
be the glue between user interface
objects and the business logic.
Now, controllers do much
more than associations,
which simply listen for events
and send values back and forth.
Controllers are very responsible objects.
They actually carry the knowledge
of how to create and layout the
various user interface objects,
such as display groups.
Based on the underlying enterprise
object's infrastructure,
like the editing contexts.
So having seen what the controllers are
and what the various display objects are,
we now have the basic building blocks
for creating Java Client applications.
So let's talk about design.
When you design a Java Client,
you primarily have two options.
You can use the Direct to
Java Client approach,
which is the so-called code-free
approach that we advocate and
is the focus of this talk.
On the other hand,
you could try kind of the
more old-fashioned approach,
which is to create all
of your interface files,
or NIBs as we like to call them,
by hand using the interface
builder application.
The choice between the two really
boils down to all the tradeoffs
that come between having a user
interface that's statically created
or one that's dynamically generated.
And I think what you'll find is that
there are several important reasons that
actually favor the dynamic approach.
One is productivity.
Your productivity will be
much higher with a dynamically
generated user interface.
It will also be easier for
you to maintain consistency
between the user interface and
Your business logic or your data model,
if in fact your user interface
is generated dynamically
from the data model.
And finally,
it is easier to localize a user
interface that has been dynamically
generated than it is to localize
one that's statically generated.
For similar reasons that make it
easier to maintain a dynamically
generated user interface,
it can soon become a nightmare if you
have a statically created interface
where you make a few little changes
and you end up having to touch many,
many files, and that can soon become
a maintenance nightmare.
So why don't we see the power of
the dynamic approach in action.
Another demonstration.
Thanks, Ernest.
Thanks, Brent.
Okay.
So we're starting from the application
that we created in the last demo,
and we're going to show you some
of the customization techniques
that we provide you for dynamically
generated user interfaces.
So with every Direct to
Java Client application,
we include a tool called the Assistant,
and it is available from the
Tools menu in the Client application,
and it's a swing application
that runs alongside the client.
And it allows us to perform basic,
pretty simple customizations
to the client application.
So for instance, by default,
the name of the query
window is Query Window,
which, you know, may be fine,
but you may want something else.
So.
We'll give it a different name.
And by default,
the first one on the application
always shows up in the upper
left-hand corner of the client screen.
And perhaps for some reason,
you want a different behavior.
So, let's go ahead and start
with the first one.
In the Windows pane here,
we're going to select
bottom left as a position,
save and restart the client application
right from within the Assistant.
And you'll notice we've changed
the title of the window and
where the window shows up.
Okay, that's all right.
Let's do something that will
be actually useful to our
clients of this application.
So we're going to open a form
window for the customer entity.
And you'll notice that
there's a lot going on here.
Well, it might be nice to hide
some of these properties.
So in the Properties
pane of the Assistant,
and you'll notice that the
Assistant follows you where you go,
we can choose to hide some of these.
So I don't want to show the
agent and I don't want to see the
suggested listings for this customer.
So I'm going to save that.
I'm going to open a different record.
for a customer.
And you'll notice in comparison,
this is the new window here that
we customized with the Assistant,
and this is the window
before it was customized.
So without writing any code,
we have a tool that helps you write rules
to simply customize your application.
Thanks, Ernest.
Thank you, Brent.
Okay.
I promise to make the next demo
a lot more challenging for him.
So let's talk about the all-important
controllers in more detail.
You're going to need the help of many
controllers to create your client.
And there are primarily
four kinds of controllers.
All of these controllers are
subclasses of the EO controller class
in the EO application framework.
First, there's the application object,
which,
like every other application object,
handles the startup process
and also application-wide
parameters such as menus.
Then,
there are the user interface controllers,
which handle the higher level
layout management tasks.
Examples include the tab view controller.
[Transcript missing]
The rule system is a simple
question and answer mechanism.
It generates an XML description
of the user interface.
Now, the rule system resides on the
server primarily for two reasons.
For sharing, because the rule system is a
computationally intensive expert system,
and it is advantageous to cache and
share the results of those computations.
For security,
because the rule system analyzes
information in the data model to generate
the description of the user interface,
you can consider that data model to
be sensitive business information.
And in general,
you do not want to send the data
model across the wire unless
it is absolutely necessary.
Now, the rule system in Java Client,
Direct to Java Client,
is really great because it provides
a lot of built-in functionality.
In other words,
there are approximately 100 default
rules that help you to create
a sophisticated user interface.
It is also easy to define custom
rules because the rule system has been
designed with extensibility in mind.
So now that we've talked about
how controllers are organized
and defined in the rule system,
why don't we step back for a moment and
take a look at the complete data flow
of a Direct to Java Client application,
or what I like to call a day in
the life of Direct to Java Client.
We start with
The application object
on the client side,
which in Java Client is an
instance of U application,
and in Direct to Java Client is an
instance of EO dynamic application.
Its most important task is to warm up
and initialize the controller factory.
Controller factory is an
object that actually builds
the hierarchy of controllers.
But to do so,
the controller factory sends out
a request to the rule system,
which as we discussed,
resides on the server.
The rule system will analyze
information in the data model as
well as rule models to generate an
XML description of the user interface,
which the controller factory
will take and actually build
the hierarchy of controllers.
The hierarchy of controllers will
actually generate the user interface
and also listen for user events,
which may trigger additional
actions on the controller factory.
Which in turn may result in the
creation of additional windows,
which of course may require additional
requests to the rule system.
I feel like I'm on the Discovery Channel,
you know.
It's like the salmon have swam upstream
to whence they came from so that
they may spawn the next generation,
and thus the cycle of life continues.
But this is pretty much a day in the life
of a Direct to Java Client application.
So now that we have spent a
day in the life of a Direct to
Java Client application together,
I feel like I've gotten to
know you all really well.
So I guess it's time to get personal.
So I think we're ready for the next step.
So we can discuss
customization techniques.
There are primarily three broad
categories of customization techniques.
Writing rules,
which means you're keeping dynamic.
We're freezing parts
of the user interface,
which means we're becoming static.
And finally, writing code so that we
can add more functionality.
To help you with writing rules,
you need a system, which Brent kindly
demonstrated for us earlier.
And that suffices for most simple tasks.
But for more complex tasks,
you may need a little more flexibility.
And that's why there's
the rule editor tool,
which allows you to write
any arbitrary rule by hand.
Freezing the user interface is
the next level of customization,
and it is a slightly heavier-weight
customization technique.
So freezing means that we're starting
to bypass the dynamic rule system
and instead using hard-coded XML that
has been saved in the file or an
interface file that you created by
hand using the interface builder tool.
And this requires more work.
On the other hand, it gives you more
flexibility over the layout.
Finally, when you want to write code,
you commonly do two things.
One is to create your own controllers.
So typically that means
writing a subclass of an
existing default controller
And you may want to do this to
add more widgets or associations.
It's up to you.
But you can even go so far as to override
the behavior of the controller factory.
And that way,
you can actually customize the flow
of the user interface completely.
We'll delve into each of
these more customization
techniques in further detail.
Let's first talk about freezing XML.
Freezing XML, as I mentioned,
allows you to bypass the
rule system and to use static
XML that's been saved in the file.
That file happens to be
a WebObjects component.
A woke component.
The reason we used a WebObjects
component is that it allows you
to mix in the dynamic elements,
such as woe conditionals
and woe repetitions.
You can even go so far as to
create your own templates,
which is a very powerful technique.
Yes,
you can use frozen XML to describe the
complete window or just part of a window.
It's up to you.
The thing to remember is to write
a rule to register that frozen
XML component with the rule system
so that it actually gets used
when the user interface is built.
Maybe we should make things a
little more concrete with a demo.
All right.
Sounds good, Ernest.
Okay, so as Ernest was saying,
when the controller
factory generates XML,
it ends up creating a
controller hierarchy for each
window in the application.
And conveniently,
in the Direct to Java Client Assistant,
there is an XML pane.
And so if you switch to that,
you see all these
wonderful XML descriptions,
each corresponding to a single
specification in the application.
So let's take a look a little
more closely at one of them.
So if we look at the
Customer Form window,
let's find the specification for that.
So the entity is Customer,
the task is Form,
and the question is Window.
And we'll just look
at a few of them here.
So the top level of the window is
described by a frame controller element.
The button bar here is described
by an action controller button.
And if we look at the first
two text field controllers,
those correspond to the first name
and the first name of the text field.
Last name widgets in the window there.
So that's kind of a concrete example
of how the XML generated is transposed
into swing widgets in the end.
So this XML is great,
but we want to know how to freeze it.
So conveniently,
since we have the XML in the Assistant,
we can simply copy it out of there
and into a new Web Audit component,
in this case,
an instance of D2W component.
So we want to freeze the listing window.
Or the form window for
the listing entity.
And it might be nice to add, like,
a badge for your real estate
agent or something there.
So we're going to freeze
XML to accomplish that.
So we need to find the XML description
for that particular task and window.
In this case, it's the entity listing
and the task form.
So I'm simply going to
select all that XML,
Copy it out of the Assistant and
back in my project.
I want to add a new
component to the project.
This is going to hold the
frozen XML that we customized.
We're going to add a file that
is a WebObjects component.
And since this is for the
listing entity for the form task,
we're going to give it that name.
So the assistant that we just invoked
actually gives us a WOL component,
but we need a D2W component.
So we're just going to change the
superclass and simply add the import
statement for the Direct to Web package.
So I guess this is writing code,
but it's not really writing code.
OK.
And finally,
in the WOL component that was generated
for us by the project builder assistant,
we're going to paste in the XML.
Whoops.
Yeah, yeah.
Okay, so we'll go back to the
assistant and paste in the XML.
And fortunately,
so I don't make any typos,
I have typed in the definition for
the controller we want to add that
will put that badge in that window.
We're in text edit and I'm just going
to slap it in at the bottom here.
Okay,
so you notice the last point on Ernest's
slide was that when you freeze XML,
you actually need to register that frozen
XML component with the rule system.
Well, all that means is you need to write
a rule to tell the rule system,
hey, I want to use frozen XML for this
particular part of my application.
So again, I have written that
rule over here before,
so I'll make sure that it's typed right.
I'm going to add it to
my project like that.
and we're gonna build and run.
Okay.
A few things you may have noticed
there that I glossed over is
that I added the new rule to
a file called d2w.d2wmodelfile.
Now, that's just simply a file
that I added to my project.
Notice also this user.d2wmodelfile.
The reason you don't want to add
your own rules there is because
that's where the direct-to-Java
client assistant puts rules.
So it has control, it owns that file,
you don't want to mess with it.
So by simply adding a file called
d2w.d2wmodel to your project,
you have control over that rule file.
So, if this works, which it will,
when we ask for a form window
for the listing entity,
we should see the powered by
web objects badge on the bottom.
There
That was a little harder, Ernest,
but next time.
Okay.
Thanks, Brent.
That wasn't too bad.
So Brent just added an import statement,
as you saw,
and he just changed the class so
that WebOpticsComponent extends,
simply because we create a
WebOpticsComponent and then
make that a D2W component to
be used with our rule system.
But some of us don't really
consider import statements
to be actual lines of code.
So I would still argue that he still
hasn't written a single line of code.
But thanks, Brent,
for demonstrating that technique.
So we've seen how to freeze XML.
Let's delve a little more
into freezing interface files.
So freezing interface files,
just like freezing XML,
allows you to bypass the
dynamic rule system to build
part of the user interface.
But it also allows you to bypass
XML generation altogether.
If you choose to freeze XML,
this means that you will have
created an interface file using
the interface builder tool.
This actually affords you the maximum
control over the layout of the widgets,
resizing behavior,
and even the kinds of widgets
that you'd like to use.
Just as with freezing XML,
you can define a complete
window or just part of one.
Similar to Freezing XML,
Freezing Interface files requires
you to write a rule to register the
interface file with the rule system
so that it actually gets used to
build part of the user interface.
Another thing to remember, though,
is that when you're mixing frozen
interfaces with dynamic ones,
you also need to write another rule
to suppress some of the standard
subcontrollers from being generated.
And if it's not too much trouble,
I think I'd like to make things
a little more concrete by asking
Brent to give us one more demo.
Okay, I suppose.
One more.
All right, so let's start with the
application from the last demo.
And let's take a look at the
form window for the agent entity.
We'll pick Andreas.
He's a nice guy.
And so this window is okay,
but you know what?
The interface I'm getting from the
dynamically generated XML and all that,
I don't really like it.
You know what I'd really like to do,
Ernest?
What would you like to do, Brent?
I would love to use Interface
Builder to build this window.
Be my guest.
All right.
So we're gonna do that.
It's actually pretty easy.
So we're gonna go to Interface Builder,
which is a tool that should
be familiar to anyone who has
done Mac OS X development.
Guess what?
We can also do Java Client
development with it.
So I'm gonna start by selecting
an empty Cocoa project type.
And the first thing I'm gonna do is
I'm gonna save it into my project.
That is the name of my project, right?
Yes.
Okay.
We are going to call it
Agent Form Window since we're customizing
the form window for the agent entity.
Since Project Builder and
Interface Builder are so smart,
it's going to ask me if I want
to insert it into the project.
Of course, it would do this,
but this is a demo,
and since everything is going so well,
this is where Ernest has obviously
sabotaged my machine so that
I cannot actually add this new file
to the target in Interface Builder.
But that's okay because
there's always a workaround.
So this is actually rather easy.
We saved the Nib file
as agent form window.
I'm simply going to drag it into
the interfaces group in project
builder and add it to the web
server target since it is associated
with the client application.
So there it is.
And I'm going to open it
from within the project.
OK.
Now we're all good.
That wasn't very nice of you, Ernest.
But we worked around it.
OK,
so there are a few things we have to do
to successfully use a Nib file within
a dynamically generated user interface.
First thing we have to do
is associate files owner,
which is the object with which
the Nib file is associated,
to a particular class.
And in this case,
we need to associate it with
the EO form controller class,
which is in the EO generation package.
For those of you who are
familiar with some of this,
you may notice that some of
the package names are a little
bit different than you expect.
We are showing you the
future version here and we've
renamed some of the packages,
so don't be confused by that.
So, anyways,
we're going to select EO form controller,
associate files owner with it.
And then I'm going to
just drag out a window,
just like you would do
building an application.
And I'm going to bring up UL Modeler.
And I still have that model file
open that we've been using throughout
the whole presentation here.
And Interface Builder and
UL Modeler can speak to each other.
We hope they can speak to each other.
And it's as easy as dragging an
entity or a relationship from
UL Modeler into the window over there.
And they're not playing nice now,
so that's why we saw
that little dialogue.
So what we got here,
if we choose Test Interface
from the Interface Builder menu,
you'll see that we're actually talking to
the data store and getting the data back.
And we have, let's
A successful master-detail relationship
just by doing that drag here.
So we select a master object
up here and we see its detail
data in the table down here.
Okay.
So, now the reason we're using Interface
Builder is because we actually want
to customize this part of the UI.
So there are a few things
I don't care about here.
I don't care about the user type,
password, login.
The agent name, first name and last name,
are probably OK.
And then down here in the detail field,
you can collapse some of these and
you can even add formatters just like
you would in a Cocoa application,
things like that.
And we translate all these
out to Swing4You so you
don't have to worry about it.
And I can even do things,
if I want to make editing
a little bit easier,
I can add some text fields.
You get the nice Aqua UI guidelines
for you even in a swing app,
which is kind of nice.
And I'll drag out a label here.
First name.
One thing to recognize in this is that
we support most of the widgets you
get in Cocoa and Interface Builder,
but not all of them,
so we have to consult the
documentation to figure that out.
You noticed when we dragged in
the relationship from Elmodeler,
it added a bunch of objects
to our nib file window.
It added a display group
for the agent entity.
It added a display group for the listings
relationship in the agent entity,
and it added this editing context object.
We need to do a few things
to get this all to work,
and one of those things
is connect files owner.
Files owner has some outlets,
and if you're familiar with
that paradigm in Cocoa,
this will make sense to you.
Otherwise, don't worry about it.
We're going to connect files
owner to the window here,
connect that on the component outlet,
and also the editing context there.
And for the text fields
that I added here,
when I select an agent name
over in this table here,
I also want that name to display in these
two text fields here so I can edit them
rather than have to type in the table,
which would be cumbersome.
So we can simply control drag
and make an association to that
property in the agent entity.
There's first name.
And then, last name.
OK.
So now we save that,
and if you test the interface,
just make sure we connected
everything correctly.
There you go.
So you can see now how the
names are displayed over there.
It's a nice feature being able
to test the interface like that.
Isn't that great?
Okay, so now it's nice that we can
use this in Interface Builder,
but your customers probably won't.
So we actually want to use this,
integrate it into our application.
So back in Project Builder,
you see we've added the
NIV file to the project.
And just like we did with Frozen XML,
we need to register this
NIV file with the rule system.
So again, I've written these rules,
so I typed them correctly.
I'm going to paste them
into my D2W model file.
And I'll explain them in a minute here.
So I'm adding two rules.
The first rule says that
for the form window,
for the agent entity,
I want to use a Nib file.
And we specify that with the archive key,
and then we point it to the name
of the Nib file we just created.
The second one speaks to the last
point on Ernest's last slide,
is that when you use a Nib file,
you also have,
you want to tell the rule system
to not generate the XML for
that part of the window for
which you're using the Nib file,
otherwise you'll have redundant
display there and it will be a
little bit weird for your users.
So if we've done everything correctly,
which I'm pretty sure we have,
we build and run the project,
it's going to find the
Nib file and include that,
and then when we ask for a form
window for the agent entity,
rather than get the dynamically generated
XML that the rule system gives us,
we should get that static interface
that we built in Interface Builder.
Okay, so I'll search for agents.
There we go.
So, that's pretty cool.
And just to show you that, yeah.
So I guess that's it.
You didn't stump me, Ernest.
Try harder next time.
I think you've earned your lunch, Brent.
Thanks.
But notice one thing.
He still didn't write
a single line of code,
but he did a lot of
clicking and dragging,
so that's okay.
So we've seen how to freeze XML,
and we've seen how to
freeze interface files.
So let's delve into the third and most
heavyweight customization technique,
writing code.
If you decide to take
the leap and write code,
the possibilities are endless.
Sadly, my time with you today is not,
so I will just brush upon some
of the things that you can do
when you choose to write code.
Probably the most common thing you'll
do is to create your own controllers.
And you'll probably do this
for a number of reasons.
But when you do,
what you'll do is you'll write
subclasses of the existing EO controller
classes that have been provided.
One thing that you can do is to try
your own custom widget or association,
if you like.
Another thing is to try a completely
different layout mechanism that
will dramatically change the way
that your user interface appears.
Another thing to do is to plug
in a special qualifier or fetch
specification to change the way that
the application retrieves data objects.
And one other thing that you can
do is to add additional actions.
So if you see the menu of your
Direct to Java Client application,
perhaps there will be another
item in there that says,
generate a report about the
business object that the
user is currently viewing.
So again, the possibilities are endless.
Now, as I mentioned before,
you can even go so far as
to programmatically change
the behavior of the factory.
Let's say that you are completely
unsatisfied with the overall structure
of a direct-to-Java client application.
You just can't stand the way that the
default application does its things.
Well, if you programmatically
change the factory behavior,
you can completely customize
the flow of the user interface.
So what this means is that you
can write a subclass of the
controller factory and plug it in,
or you can even implement some
of the delegate methods that the
controller factory provides in
order to change its behavior.
Now, I could burn up the remaining
time that I have together with you
talking about these customization
techniques in more detail,
especially programmatically
changing the factory behavior.
I think that could take
the rest of the session.
But because I think it won't really
be necessary for the most part,
and because it will be so much work,
especially for Brent if
I force him to do it,
let's not and say we did.
Instead,
let's use some of our not-so-endless time
together to talk about a topic that is of
great interest to many people these days,
web services.
Hopefully,
you attended the previous session,
session 705,
on web objects and web services.
There was a pretty good explanation
of what web services do.
They are, roughly speaking,
public APIs available over the Internet.
So these are programs that you can
execute and use in your own applications.
Well, it turns out that there are some
really interesting symptoms.
There are similarities and differences
between web services and EO distribution.
These are both technologies that are
distributed and platform independent.
Key difference, however,
is that EO distribution
is highly performant.
It is tuned for interoperability
with enterprise objects.
So there's the simple reason.
If you attended the previous session,
you found that the crux of
the support for building web
services and web objects is,
well, direct-to-web services.
So it may interest you to know that
direct-to-web services and direct-to-Java
client use the same kind of rule system.
So this is, I think,
the most interesting part about
working in rapid development,
the ability to go beyond the
traditional programming techniques
and to use advanced techniques
to create powerful applications
in such a short amount of time.
Same thing that we have for
Direct to Java Client applies
for Direct to Web Services.
What you may have also noticed in
that session is that there is an
extremely powerful configuration
tool for Direct to Web Services,
namely the Direct to
Web Services Assistant.
As it so happens,
the Direct to Web Services Assistant uses
many of the same customization techniques
that we've been talking about today,
such as writing rules or freezing XML.
So now that we've talked
about web services,
I could ask Brent to come back
up here and give another demo.
But actually,
I'd like to give him a break.
And I will actually show a project
that we've prepared for you.
So we've already created a
project that has client stubs
for accessing a web service.
So we created those client
stubs using the Apache Access,
WSDL to Java generation tool.
It's a really neat tool.
And we found the web service
just on xmethods.com,
or you can go to other things like
South City and search for web service.
Why did we want to use a web service?
Well, if you remember the--
If you remember the way that
the windows look inside of our
Direct to Java Client application,
notice that there were many
fields for certain windows,
especially for the listing form window.
So there,
if you wanted to specify the address,
you'd have to fill in the street,
the city, the state, the zip code.
And what we were thinking is that
it might be really helpful to save
the user of such an application
time if they were to be able to just
type in the zip code and to just
get the city and state from that.
Now, when you create an application,
really you want to be focusing
on the business logic required to
create an interesting application.
But there are certain kinds of business
logic that you may not be interested in.
So you may not necessarily
want to get into the business
of writing or publishing a
service that returns a city and
state based on the zip code.
So why not let someone else do that?
So you can focus on the business
logic that you find interesting.
So to do that, it was really simple.
We took the frozen XML for
the listing form window,
which is similar to the
result of the third demo that
Brent gave when he froze the XML.
And let's make this a little bigger.
And what we did actually was to plug
in our own controller into that form.
So actually, right here,
inside of the frozen XML,
we simply inserted one more node,
which is to use a controller that we
created called the zip code controller.
And there's a label that says,
fill in the city and the state.
And if you look at the user
interface of that application,
you'll find that it's there.
But...
Let's take a closer
look at that controller.
If you look at the zip code controller,
it turns out that the code for that is
really short and is really very simple,
because what we're doing is
we're extending a class called
the EO Web Service Controller.
So the important thing about this
class is that it implements a
method called execute with object.
I'll return to this later.
Let's take a look at the web
service controller itself.
This is just a very simple
example of what you can do
when you create a controller.
So it has the default constructor and
one that takes an XML on archiver.
That's not really so interesting.
And in addition,
it has logic for the enabling
and disabling of the button.
The most important thing to note is
that there's this method called execute.
Which looks at the selected
objects in the controller and for
each of those objects invokes a
method called execute with object.
And as a convenience, will pass along the
selected object itself.
So given that this web
service controller,
which by the way is an action trigger and
will be available in the next release,
does all that for you.
All that the zip code controller
has to do is implement the
execute with object method.
The code for this is actually
very simple and very standard.
And what it's really doing is it's
making a connection with the service,
and it is sending out a request.
So given the zip code,
the value of the zip code that
is currently in the controller,
it will actually send a
request to that web service to
get back the city and state,
and the service returns it as one string.
So we just take care of a
little logic to extract out the
city and extract out the state.
And we set that on the selected object.
And that's all this controller has to do.
So if we go back to the application,
And we're to type in the zip code.
Unfortunately,
that's all that this controller will do,
because for the moment,
the web service is actually down.
And that's just one of the perils
of working with web services.
You want to use a reliable web
service in your application.
But note that the controller
gives a very nice message,
an error dialog that says,
please try again later.
But if that service were
to be up and running,
the answer would have been that
92612 corresponds to Irvine,
California.
And I would have asked,
to a round of rousing applause,
is there Irvine in the house?
Unfortunately,
that will have to happen next year.
So if we could go back to the slides.
I think you'll have noticed something
very interesting with the series of
demos that Brent kindly did for us
and for one that I did just up there,
which is that
With Direct to Java Client,
your development process
actually begins to evolve,
the process itself,
to the point where you can
actually develop in iterations
and focus on the business logic.
So you can develop in iterative cycles,
and at the beginning and
end of each iteration,
you will have a fully
functional application.
So this is very much compatible with
the spirit of iterative development
methodologies like extreme programming.
So the important thing is that at
all times in the development cycle,
you have a fully functional
application that you can always choose,
if you want,
to deliver immediately to your
customers or to your investors.
It's really up to you.
So what we recommend is that you
start by creating a database and
a data model sufficient enough
to run the default application.
And in Direct to Java Client,
customization is really quick and easy.
So what you find is that
prototyping becomes very efficient.
And since customers, as customers do,
have a tendency to change their
minds about the user interface even
after the product has been delivered,
what we recommend is that you
delay polishing the user interface.
Make the changes to the user interface
layout and application logic later,
until the business logic
has been finalized.
And that way you will be able to
deliver maximum value to your customers
or your investors at all times
throughout the development cycle.
So the benefits of developing
this approach are many.
As I mentioned,
fast and efficient development.
which is one of the key advantages
of using Direct to Java Client,
the fact that it generates
user interface dynamically in
such a short amount of time,
and that there's an immediate
reaction to changes in business
requirements and data model.
How many times have you seen a
project not quite meet requirements
or to have to accommodate late
incoming requirements because,
sadly, as the reality of developing is,
the requirements change?
Well, with Direct to Java Client,
you can actually see immediately what
those changes in the business logic or
data model would do for the application.
Key advantage, again,
is that it reduces testing time.
Direct to Java Client provides
all of these built-in application
functionality components for you,
and it's reliable,
so you'll spend less time testing.
And finally, and perhaps what is the
most important thing,
is that you can start to
return to your core competency,
which should be the business logic.
Because that's really where
you're adding most value,
the most value as a client
application developer.
Not all of the client, you know,
application interface logic,
but actually the business logic.
So it is actually my privilege to be
able to give you a glimpse of where
we're focusing our efforts into the
future of Direct to Java Client.
So it turns out that we've heard
some feedback from many of you.
And what we've heard is that
three-tier applications are nice,
and they provide hooks for security.
But sometimes they're a
little bit hard to maintain,
or even to understand.
So as a result, we're
In the next release,
what we plan to do is to provide
support for two-tier applications.
So what we've done is we've actually
allowed you to eliminate the middle tier,
to cut out the middle man, so to speak,
so that there's no application server.
And the client will just directly
access the data from the database.
So that will be coming
in the next release,
or what we plan to put
in the next release.
Hey, Bob.
There will also be a number of new
controllers which help you to add
more polish to your user interface.
There's a really fun-to-use
split view controller,
and there's actually an extremely
powerful tree view controller,
which we saw in the direct web services
assistant demo in the previous session,
and which is a controller that
I like to use quite a lot.
And so for those of you who
have been waiting a long time
for a tree view controller,
you won't have to wait much longer.
All things willing.
And along the way...
Which is great for you, by the way.
A number of enhancements have
been made to the dynamic layout.
Issues such as having to do
with the resizing of widgets or
the placement of widgets have,
for the most part, been resolved.
So this is, again,
work that you didn't want to do,
that you shouldn't have to do,
and that you will no longer have to do.
Thank you.
I wasn't the only one who did it,
but I don't mind taking the credit.
And as always,
we are looking for new ways to
better support web services.
Because again, web services are not
just a really hot topic,
but going to be very
important sooner than later.
And so the EO Web Services Controller in
my demo that I showed you was
just one example of some of the
things that we're thinking of doing.
There are probably a
lot more that we can do.
But again,
we're going to try our hardest to
make WebObjects the best platform
for developing web services and the
applications that use those web services.
So in summary,
I would just like to say that
Direct to Java Client is truly
a developer's best friend,
because it makes your
life a whole lot easier.
The key thing about Direct to
Java Client is that it dynamically
generates user interface based
on information in the data model.
Direct to Java Client comes
with a great deal of controller
classes that provide pre-built,
pre-tested functionality for you.
Again, that's probably a key advantage
of using Direct to Java Client,
that you get so much for free.
Finally, Direct to Java Client has been
designed for extensibility.
There are a number of powerful
customization techniques so that
you can create precisely the kind
of user interface that you desire.
Thank you.
If you haven't already,
there is a WebObjects lab in room L,
and you can still attend today,
and also Thursday and Friday,
so you can start to experiment with
Direct to Java Client right here at WWDC.
In terms of a roadmap,
some of the sessions that you can
still attend include the session
that's coming up in this room,
the WebObjects Java Client session.
And I strongly recommend,
for those of you who have a little bit of
background in EOF and want to learn more,
to attend the Advanced Enterprise Objects
Frameworks session.
Because Direct to Java Client,
it turns out,
is actually a very good tool for
testing your business logic and
some of the advanced techniques
that you want to use with EOF.
can contact Tony and Bob if you
have any comments or questions
about Direct to Java Client.
And for training, support,
and certification,
you can contact iServices.
For more information,
there's a great deal of
documentation online.
By now, you should be familiar
with all the links.
Interestingly,
there are also a number of user groups
or other support groups online that have
a great deal of information as well.
And I strongly recommend that you
read Java Client Desktop Applications.
This is a terrific resource.
It has a lot more information,
a lot more detail about things like
programmatic customization techniques,
some of which I couldn't cover in as
much detail as I would have liked.
Had my time with you been endless.
It's all right here in
this great reference.
To access the documentation,
most of it can be accessed online.
Some of it comes on the CD, in the box,
or can be printed on demand.
It's a wealth of great documentation now,
and we're adding more all the time.